Related
What happened after all of the punic wars? (Aftermath)
After the fall and destruction of Carthage, the city itself was left in ruins for many years: Sempronius Gracchus tried to built a colony there, but failed, and it wasn’t until Julius Caesar supported the reconstruction of the city that it rose again, as the main Roman city in the Maghreb.

Meanwhile Utica, another Phoenician city, was the capital of Rome’ African provinces. Utica had been a city-state who had joined Carthage’s enemy and as reward, was given some Carthaginan territory, became the capital of Rome’s African provinces for many years and became a civitas libera, a ‘free city’ exempt from taxes.



The immediate aftermath of Punic wars is annexation of Carthaghe’s possessions and territories by Rome. Many Carthaginian coastal settlements were turned to Roman towns and Carthage itself was burned to the ground.

The political aftermath saw Rome emerge as the main power in the Mediterranean, having defeated the Achaean league and subdued Greece at that time as well. Not long after, the last king of Pergamon, Attalus III, leaves his kingdom to the Roman Republic in his will.

What would happen next are:

Conflict with the rising kingdom of Pontus
Threats of the Germanic peoples from the north
Rise of Gaius Marius

Related
How did the Carthaginians view Rome before the Punic Wars?
They did not think of Rome much until the First Samnite War. Let us be clear about one thing, Rome was considered a very minor power up to about 350 BC. 40 years before Rome had been sacked by the Gauls and Rome had spent decades fighting off its neighbors. Rome almost bankrupted itself building the Servian Wall.

Even so, Carthage’s wall was three times longer and half again as tall. The leading cities in Italy at the time were Capua and Tarentum. Rome and Carthage signed a few treaties but Romans were not a sailing people.

Carthage was not impressed or concerned. Carthage’s concerns were the Etruscans and Greco Sicilians/Italians; Greeks and Etruscans were considered excellent sailors. Carthage had consolidated Corsica and Sardinia and was making moves into Sicily. They would certainly run into a vigorous Greek response there.

Then the First Samnite War occurred(343–341 BC). Then, the Second Latin War (340–338 BC) happened. Rome made significant gains:


Note Rome’s expansion on the Western coast in red. The Carthaginians took serious note. The Carthaginians were moving through Sicily and had their eyes on more gains:


If this trend continued, the city-states would face each other. It took the Romans another forty years to defeat the Samnites. Almost immediately after, the Romans turned North and fought another Etruscan-Gallic War.

Carthage had expanded its hold on Sicily and expanded elsewhere too. However, the Greeks were holding on….barely. They still served as a buffer against Rome.

By then, Rome had Carthage’s full attention. The Romans had a new battle formation and had defeated very strong armies, well known to Carthaginians. The Carthaginians knew the Samnites, Etruscans, Celts and the Greeks; these were certainly NOT lightweights. After the Roman-Etruscan/Gallic Wars, this was the situation:


When the Greco-Italians called to Pyrrhus of Epirus for help against the Romans and Carthaginians, the Romans and Carthage were on the same side.

Pyrrhus responded and fought Romans and Carthaginians for the Greco-Italians.


He was eventually driven out. Rome used her muscle and endurance to do it. Carthage used its money, mercenaries and navy. Carthage respected Greek soldiers. The Romans had taken on the phalanx and they had eventually prevailed; initially with what should have been catastrophic losses. Rome was a muscle in the mud type of power; stubborn infantry with technique and endurance.

The Greeks and Carthaginians were impressed. Pyrrhus was the best general of that generation. To send him back to Greece beaten and impoverished was an achievement. They, nor the Carthaginians, had faced this before.

At the end, both powers were directly across from each other:


Both sides eyed each with suspicion. Rome was a stubborn, small city state, with access to massive, well trained land armies. Carthage was a wealthy, massive city state, with large well trained naval armadas. Both had expansionist world views.

For a decade, Rome and Carthage maneuvered around each other, careful not to provoke hostilities. Carthage was not a land power and the mercenaries they could procure, could not match the Romans prowess on land. Romans were farmers and, up to that point, had shown no interest in sea power.

It was not an exaggeration to claim, these were two cultures that could not be more dissimilar.

Some ancient authors claimed Pyrrhus, as he prepared to abandon his campaign in Italy, predicted Rome and Carthage were doomed to fight. Either by design or accident, the elephant and whale would wage war against each other.

As it turned out, they stumbled into war over a bunch of criminal mercenaries that neither side liked: Mamertines - Wikipedia