The Punic wars are known as a series of belic conflicts between the Republic of Rome and the Carthaginian Empire.

Why is it called the “Punic Wars”? The romans used the “punici” concept referring to the Carthaginians themselves and their Phoenician ancestors. On the other hand, Carthaginians referred to this event as the “Roman Wars”.

These conflicts occurred in the 246 B.C and the 146 B.C., when Rome and Carthage were the principal powers of the Mediterranean.

 The Punic Wars are well known because they established the Roman supremacy in the Mediterranean, as well as the Macedonian Wars, and the Roman-Seleucid Wars.

Background
The background of these series of conflicts takes place in the expansion of the Roman Republic, which, in the 3rd century B.C had conquered Greece, controlling an important Mediterranean region.

On one hand, the Phoenicians founded their city in the Tunisian cost in 264 B.C. This Carthage urban center rapidly transformed into a commercial empire, owning one of the most powerful armies in the world.

The Romans on the other hand, had countless members on their army at service for their conquest interests.

Centuries ago, the patricians had adopted an imperial culture, which eased all social tensions due to the common external enemy.

That is how Rome started to develop as an emerging empire, distributing the spoils of their numerous conquests between the citizens.

Was Carthage doomed from the start due to its geography? That is a theory I debunk in another article: Why are Hotter countries poorer?

First Punic War (264 – 241 B.C.)
At the beginning, the first Punic War was a terrestrial conflict that originated in Sicily, but it quickly developed into a naval conflict as well, where both nations suffered great losses, but Rome obtained the victory in the end.

The defeat destabilized Carthage, which lost an important part of its territory.

What were the Punic Wars fought over? The Wars developed due to the conflict that the Romans started with the objective of controlling Sicily.

Second Punic War (218 – 202 B.C)
The second Punic War is the most famous out of the three, for it is when Carthaginian General Aníbal performed its expedition.

Aníbal crossed the Alpes with a military troop in direction to Rome, he invaded the peninsula and defeated the Roman army that defended it.

Regardless of the victory, Aníbal was no able to invade the Roman city due to a lack of troops, whom he had lost among the Alps, as well as chivalry and elephants.


Hannibal celebrating victory over Romans. Source.
Third Punic War (149 – 146 B.C)
The third Punic War compound the belic conflict which led to the total eradication of the Carthaginian civilization and culture.

This one originated due to the hatred between the Romans and Carthaginians, as well as the resurgence of Carthage’s army.

The third war was the shortest out of all, and it mainly consisted in the siege, assassination, and capture of their habitants, as well as the destruction of all that stood in the way.  

Is the defeat of Carthage related to the state of Africa today? It only shows that everything is connected, and it can even have an impact on another continent. you may be interested in: What is Globalization and how it affects us.

Causes
The ambition of both nations to control the Mediterranean.
The Carthaginian hatred towards the Romans.
The Roman interest in dominating Sicily, which was Carthaginian territory.
The invasion of the Italian peninsula lead by Aníbal.
Effect
Complete loss of the Carthage population and culture.
The removal of the “Carthage” denomination of the territory. Now named Africa.
The loss of information available about the Carthage culture.
Even though the Greeks and Romans registered some information about the historical events and characteristics of the culture, today we almost know nothing about it.

